Hva er et prosjekt?
Et prosjekt er en midlertidig innsats som har en tydelig definert start- og sluttdato, samt et spesifikt mål eller en ønsket utgang. Prosjekter blir ofte gjennomført for å oppnå noe unikt, som kan være å levere et bestemt produkt, tjeneste eller resultat. Prosessen med å gjennomføre et prosjekt innebærer vanligvis en systematisk tilnærming som inkluderer planlegging, utførelse og oppfølging.
Hva er et prosjekt?
Aktiviteter som mangler et distinkt, midlertidig mål, et unikt resultat og et definert endepunkt regnes vanligvis ikke som prosjekter.
Hva er prosjektets egenskaper?
•        Unikt: Et prosjekt har sin egen identitet og innebærer arbeid som ikke tidligere er blitt gjennomført på samme måte.
•        Mål: Et prosjekt har et tydelig definert mål eller en ønsket sluttresultat. Målet er vanligvis spesifikt, målbart, oppnåelig, relevant og tidsbestemt
•        Utgang: Et prosjektet produserer en sluttprodukt, en tjeneste eller en leveranse som er konkret og målbar. 
•        Begrenset ressurs: Prosjekter er underlagt begrensninger når det gjelder tid, kostnader og ressurser. Disse begrensningene gjør at prosjektledelsen må balansere og optimalisere bruken av tilgjengelige ressurser for å oppnå prosjektmålene.
•        Teamarbeid: Prosjekter involverer vanligvis et team av enkeltpersoner med ulike ferdigheter og kompetanse som samarbeider for å oppnå prosjektmålene. Effektiv kommunikasjon og samarbeid er viktig for suksess.
•        Komplekst: Prosjekter kan inneholde mange variabler, avhengigheter, usikkerheter og utfordringer som krever grundig planlegging, styring og overvåking.
Hva med programvareprosjekter?
Et programvareutviklingsprosjekt er et prosjekt med det formål å utvikle, implementere eller forbedre programvareapplikasjoner eller systemer. En type programvare bør være resultatet av prosjektet. Noen typer programvareprosjekter:        
•        Ny programvareutvikling: lage en helt ny programvareapplikasjon fra bunnen av. Dette kan inkludere alt fra en enkel mobilapp til en kompleks bedriftsprogramvareløsning.
•        Programvareoppgradering: forbedre en eksisterende programvareapplikasjon ved å legge til nye funksjoner, fikse feil, eller tilpasse den til nye plattformer
•        Open Source-prosjekter: fellesskapet kan bidra til utviklingen og forbedringen av programvaren. Eksempler inkluderer Linux-kjernen og Firefox-nettleseren.
•        Forskning og utviklingsprosjekter (FoU): utføre eksperimentell forskning og utvikling for å utforske nye teknologier og konsepter som kan føre til fremtidige programvareinnovasjoner.
Prosjekt aktør
Enkeltpersoner eller grupper som har en interesse eller er direkte berørt av resultatet av et prosjekt som kan påvirke prosjektets suksess
Organisasjonen er ofte interessert i prosjektets tilpasning til selskapets strategiske mål, økonomiske resultater og generelle suksess. De sørger for prosjektets finansiering og ressurser og tar viktige beslutninger om igangsetting og videreføring.
Utviklingsteamet består av personer som er ansvarlige for å designe, kode, teste og implementere prosjektet. Dette inkluderer programvareutviklere, designere, testere og andre tekniske eksperter.
Ledere på ulike nivåer (f.eks. prosjektledere, teamledere, avdelingsledere) som er ansvarlige for å planlegge, overvåke og koordinere prosjektet. De sikrer at prosjektoppgavene fullføres i tide, innenfor rammen og innenfor budsjett. 
Kunder er eksterne personer som ofte er end users eller innkjøpere av prosjektets leveranser. Deres tilbakemeldinger og tilfredshet er avgjørende for prosjektets suksess og organisasjonens omdømme.
Brukere er individer som vil samhandle direkte med og dra nytte av prosjektets utfall. De kan være ansatte i organisasjonen eller eksterne brukere.
Et team og teamarbeid
En gruppe mennesker knyttet sammen i arbeid eller aktivitet for å oppnå et felles mål. 
Et team blir mer enn bare en samling mennesker når en sterk følelse av gjensidig forpliktelse skaper synergi, og dermed genererer ytelse som er større enn summen av ytelsen til dets individuelle medlemmer.
Teamarbeid er en samarbeidsinnsats fra en gruppe individer som jobber sammen for å oppnå et felles mål. Det innebærer koordinert bruk av hvert teammedlems ferdigheter, kunnskaper og ressurser for å løse problemer, ta beslutninger og produsere ønskede resultater.
Hva er prosjektledelse?
Prosjektledelse er disiplinen for å planlegge, organisere, utføre og kontrollere ressurser (inkludert mennesker, tid, budsjett og omfang) for å oppnå spesifikke mål og oppfylle suksesskriteriene til et prosjekt. 
Det innebærer å bruke kunnskap, ferdigheter, verktøy og teknikker for å administrere et prosjekt effektivt gjennom hele livssyklusen. 
Prosjektledelse er en strukturert tilnærming for å sikre at prosjekter fullføres til rett tid, innenfor omfang og innenfor budsjett samtidig som de oppfyller de ønskede kvalitetsstandardene.
Prosjektledelse er viktig fordi…
Ta med lederskap
Sørg for klart fokus og mål
Oppnå realistisk prosjektplanlegging
Kvalitetskontroll
Risikostyring
Ordnet prosess
Kontinuerlig tilsyn
Fagkompetanse
Project management process
Project knowledge areas

Textbook:
WH A T I S A P R O J E C T ?
To discuss project management, it is important to understand the concept of a project.
A project is a temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product, service, or
result. 7 Operations, on the other hand, is work done in organizations to sustain the business.
Projects are different from operations in that they end when their objectives have
been reached or the project has been terminated.
Examples of Information Technology Projects
Projects can be large or small and involve one person or thousands of people. They can be
done in one day or take years to complete. As described earlier, information technology
projects involve using hardware, software, and/or networks to create a product, service, or
result. Examples of information technology projects include the following:
A technician replaces ten laptops for a small department
A small software development team adds a new feature to an internal software
application for the finance department
4
Chapter 1
A college campus upgrades its technology infrastructure to provide wireless
Internet access across the whole campus
A cross-functional taskforce in a company decides what Voice-over-Internet-
Protocol (VoIP) system to purchase and how it will be implemented
A company develops a new system to increase sales force productivity and customer
relationship management
A television network implements a system to allow viewers to vote for contestants
and provide other feedback on programs
The automobile industry develops a Web site to streamline procurement
A government group develops a system to track child immunizations
A large group of volunteers from organizations throughout the world develops
standards for environmentally friendly or green IT
Gartner, Inc., a prestigious consulting firm, identified the top ten strategic technologies
for 2008. A few of these technologies include the following:
Green IT: Simply defined, green IT or green computing involves developing
and using computer resources in an efficient way to improve economic viability,
social responsibility, and environmental impact. For example, government
regulations now encourage organizations and IT departments to use lowemission
building materials, recycle computing equipment, and use alternative
energy and other green technologies.
Unified communications: The majority of organizations are expected to
migrate from PBX (private branch exchange) to IP (Internet protocol) telephony
in the next three years.
Business process modeling: Enterprise and process architects, senior developers,
and business process analysts must work together to help organizations
effectively use IT to improve processes. Business process modeling (BPM)
suites are expected to fill a critical role as a compliment to service-oriented
architecture (SOA).
Virtualization 2.0: Virtualization hides the physical characteristics of computing
resources from their users, such as making a single server, operating system,
application, or storage device appear to function as multiple virtual
resources. Virtualization technologies can improve IT resource management
and increase flexibility for adapting to changing requirements and workloads.
Virtualization 2.0 adds automation technologies so that resource efficiency can
improve dramatically.
Social software: Most students and professionals today use online social networking
sites such as MySpace, Facebook, LinkedIn, and YouTube to collaborate
with others. Organizations will increasingly use social software
technologies to augment traditional collaboration.8
As you can see, a wide variety of projects use information technologies, and organizations
rely on them for their success.

Project Attributes
As you can see, projects come in all shapes and sizes. The following attributes help to define
a project further:
A project has a unique purpose. Every project should have a well-defined
objective. For example, Anne Roberts, the Director of the Project Management
Office in the opening case, might sponsor an information technology collaboration
project to develop a list and initial analysis of potential information technology
projects that might improve operations for the company. The unique
purpose of this project would be to create a collaborative report with ideas
from people throughout the company. The results would provide the basis for
further discussions and projects. As in this example, projects result in a unique
product, service, or result.
A project is temporary. A project has a definite beginning and a definite end.
In the information technology collaboration project, Anne might form a team
of people to work immediately on the project, and then expect a report and
an executive presentation of the results in one month.
A project is developed using progressive elaboration. Projects are often
defined broadly when they begin, and as time passes, the specific details of the
project become clearer. Therefore, projects should be developed in increments.
A project team should develop initial plans and then update them with
more detail based on new information. For example, suppose a few people submitted
ideas for the information technology collaboration project, but they did
not clearly address how the ideas would support the business strategy of
improving operations. The project team might decide to prepare a questionnaire
for people to fill in as they submit their ideas to improve the quality of
the inputs.
A project requires resources, often from various areas. Resources include people,
hardware, software, and other assets. Many projects cross departmental
or other boundaries to achieve their unique purposes. For the information
technology collaboration project, people from information technology, marketing,
sales, distribution, and other areas of the company would need to work
together to develop ideas. The company might also hire outside consultants to
provide input. Once the project team has selected key projects for implementation,
they will probably require additional resources. And to meet new
project objectives, people from other companies product suppliers and consulting
companies may be added. Resources, however, are limited and must
be used effectively to meet project and other corporate goals.
A project should have a primary customer or sponsor. Most projects have
many interested parties or stakeholders, but someone must take the primary
role of sponsorship. The project sponsor usually provides the direction and
funding for the project. In this case, Anne Roberts would be the sponsor for the
information technology collaboration project. Once further information technology
projects are selected, however, the sponsors for those projects would
be senior managers in charge of the main parts of the company affected by the
projects. For example, if the vice president of sales initiates a project to
7
Introduction to Project Management
improve direct product sales using the Internet, he or she might be the project
sponsor.
A project involves uncertainty. Because every project is unique, it is sometimes
difficult to define its objectives clearly, estimate how long it will take to
complete, or determine how much it will cost. External factors also cause
uncertainty, such as a supplier going out of business or a project team member
needing unplanned time off. This uncertainty is one of the main reasons project
management is so challenging, especially on projects involving new
technologies.
An effective project manager is crucial to a project s success. Project managers work
with the project sponsors, the project team, and the other people involved in a project to
meet project goals.
The Triple Constraint
Every project is constrained in different ways by its scope, time, and cost goals. These limitations
are sometimes referred to in project management as the triple constraint. To create
a successful project, a project manager must consider scope, time, and cost and
balance these three often-competing goals. He or she must consider the following:
Scope: What work will be done as part of the project? What unique product,
service, or result does the customer or sponsor expect from the project? How
will the scope be verified?
Time: How long should it take to complete the project? What is the project s
schedule? How will the team track actual schedule performance? Who can
approve changes to the schedule?
Cost: What should it cost to complete the project? What is the project s budget?
How will costs be tracked? Who can authorize changes to the budget?
Figure 1-1 illustrates the three dimensions of the triple constraint. Each area scope,
time, and cost has a target at the beginning of the project. For example, the information
technology collaboration project might have an initial scope of producing a 40- to 50-page
report and a one-hour presentation on about 30 potential information technology projects.
The project manager might further define project scope to include providing a description
of each potential project, an investigation of what other companies have implemented for
similar projects, a rough time and cost estimate, and assessments of the risk and potential
payoff as high, medium, or low. The initial time estimate for this project might be one
month, and the cost estimate might be $45,000 $50,000. These expectations provide the
targets for the scope, time, and cost dimensions of the project. Note that the scope and cost
goals in this example include ranges the report can be between 40- to 50-pages long and
the project can cost between $45,000 and $50,000. Because projects involve uncertainty
and limited resources, projects rarely finish according to discrete scope, time, and cost
goals originally planned. Instead of discrete target goals, it is often more realistic to set a
range of goals such as spending between $45,000 and $50,000 and having the length of the
report between 40 and 50 pages. These goals might mean hitting the target, but not the
bull s eye.
Managing the triple constraint involves making trade-offs between scope, time, and cost
goals for a project. For example, you might need to increase the budget for a project to meet
8
Chapter 1
scope and time goals. Alternatively, you might have to reduce the scope of a project to meet
time and cost goals. Experienced project managers know that you must decide which
aspect of the triple constraint is most important. If time is most important, you must often
change the initial scope and/or cost goals to meet the schedule. If scope goals are most
important, you may need to adjust time and/or cost goals.
For example, to generate project ideas, suppose the project manager for the information
technology collaboration project sent an e-mail survey to all employees, as planned.
The initial time and cost estimate may have been one week and $5,000 to collect ideas
based on this e-mail survey. Now, suppose the e-mail survey generated only a few good project
ideas, and the scope goal was to collect at least 30 good ideas. Should the project team
use a different method like focus groups or interviews to collect ideas? Even though it was
not in the initial scope, time, or cost estimates, it would really help the project. Since good
ideas are crucial to project success, it would make sense to inform the project sponsor that
you want to make adjustments.
Although the triple constraint describes how the basic elements of a project scope,
time, and cost interrelate, other elements can also play significant roles. Quality is often
a key factor in projects, as is customer or sponsor satisfaction. Some people, in fact, refer
to the quadruple constraint of project management, which includes quality as well as
scope, time, and cost. Others believe that quality considerations, including customer
Successful project
management means
meeting all three
goals (scope, time,
and cost)—and
satisfying the project’s
sponsor! Target
Introduction to Project Management
satisfaction, must be inherent in setting the scope, time, and cost goals of a project. A project
team may meet scope, time, and cost goals but fail to meet quality standards or satisfy
their sponsor, if they have not adequately addressed these concerns. For example, Anne
Roberts may receive a 50-page report describing 30 potential information technology
projects and hear a presentation on the findings of the report. The project team may have
completed the work on time and within the cost constraint, but the quality may have been
unacceptable. Anne s view of an executive presentation may be very different from the project
teams view. The project manager should be communicating with the sponsor throughout
the project to make sure the project meets his or her expectations.
How can you avoid the problems that occur when you meet scope, time, and cost goals,
but lose sight of quality or customer satisfaction? The answer is good project management,
which includes more than meeting the triple constraint.
Project management is the application of knowledge, skills, tools and techniques to project
activities to meet project requirements. 11 Project managers must not only strive to
meet specific scope, time, cost, and quality goals of projects, they must also facilitate the
entire process to meet the needs and expectations of the people involved in or affected by
project activities.
Figure 1-2 illustrates a framework to help you understand project management. Key
elements of this framework include the project stakeholders, project management knowledge
areas, project management tools and techniques, and the contribution of successful
projects to the enterprise.
Project Stakeholders
Stakeholders are the people involved in or affected by project activities and include the
project sponsor, project team, support staff, customers, users, suppliers, and even
9 Knowledge areas
opponents of the project. These stakeholders often have very different needs and expectations.
For example, building a new house is a well-known example of a project. There are
several stakeholders involved in a home construction project.
The project sponsors would be the potential new homeowners. They would
be the people paying for the house and could be on a very tight budget, so they
would expect the contractor to provide accurate estimates of the costs involved
in building the house. They would also need a realistic idea of when they could
move in and what type of home they could afford given their budget constraints.
The new homeowners would have to make important decisions to
keep the costs of the house within their budget. Can they afford to finish the
basement right away? If they can afford to finish the basement, will it affect the
projected move-in date? In this example, the project sponsors are also the customers
and users for the product, which is the house.
The project manager in this example would normally be the general contractor
responsible for building the house. He or she needs to work with all the project
stakeholders to meet their needs and expectations.
The project team for building the house would include several construction
workers, electricians, carpenters, and so on. These stakeholders would need
to know exactly what work they must do and when they need to do it. They
would need to know if the required materials and equipment will be at the construction
site or if they are expected to provide the materials and equipment.
Their work would need to be coordinated since there are many interrelated
factors involved. For example, the carpenter cannot put in kitchen cabinets
until the walls are completed.
Support staff might include the buyers employers, the general contractor s
administrative assistant, and other people who support other stakeholders. The
buyers employers might expect their employees to still complete their work
but allow some flexibility so they can visit the building site or take phone calls
related to building the house. The contractor s administrative assistant would
support the project by coordinating meetings between the buyers, the contractor,
suppliers, and so on.
Building a house requires many suppliers. The suppliers would provide the
wood, windows, flooring materials, appliances, and so on. Suppliers would
expect exact details on what items they need to provide, where and when to
deliver those items, and so on.
There may or may not be opponents of a project. In this example, there might
be a neighbor who opposes the project because the workers aremaking somuch
noise that she cannot concentrate on her work at home, or the noise might wake
her sleeping children. She might interrupt the workers to voice her complaints
or even file a formal complaint. Or, the neighborhoodmight have association
rules concerning new home design and construction. If the homeowners did not
follow these rules, theymight have to halt construction due to legal issues.
As you can see from this example, there are many different stakeholders on projects,
and they often have different interests. Stakeholders needs and expectations are important
in the beginning and throughout the life of a project. Successful project managers develop
Project management knowledge areas describe the key competencies that project managers
must develop. The center of Figure 1-2 shows the nine knowledge areas of project
management. The four core knowledge areas of project management include project scope,
time, cost, and quality management. These are core knowledge areas because they lead to
specific project objectives.
Project scope management involves defining and managing all the work
required to complete the project successfully.
Project time management includes estimating how long it will take to complete
the work, developing an acceptable project schedule, and ensuring timely completion
of the project.
Project cost management consists of preparing and managing the budget for
the project.
Project quality management ensures that the project will satisfy the stated or
implied needs for which it was undertaken.
The four facilitating knowledge areas of project management are human resource, communications,
risk, and procurement management. These are called facilitating knowledge
areas because they are the processes through which the project objectives are achieved.
Project human resource management is concerned with making effective use
of the people involved with the project.
Project communications management involves generating, collecting, disseminating,
and storing project information.
Project risk management includes identifying, analyzing, and responding to
risks related to the project.
Project procurement management involves acquiring or procuring goods and
services for a project from outside the performing organization.
Project integration management, the ninth knowledge area, is an overarching function
that affects and is affected by all of the other knowledge areas. Project managers must have
knowledge and skills in all nine of these areas. This text includes an entire chapter on each
of these knowledge areas because all of them are crucial to project success.
Project Management Tools and Techniques
Thomas Carlyle, a famous historian and author, stated, Man is a tool-using animal.Without
tools he is nothing, with tools he is all. As the world continues to become more complex, it
is evenmore important for people to develop and use tools, especially for managing important
projects. Project management tools and techniques assist projectmanagers and their
teams in carrying out work in all nine knowledge areas. For example, some popular timemanagement
tools and techniques include Gantt charts, project network diagrams, and critical
path analysis. Table 1-1 lists some commonly used tools and techniques by knowledge
area. You will learnmore about these and other tools and techniques throughout this text.
12
Chapter 1
A 2006 survey of 753 project and program managers was conducted to rate several
project management tools. Respondents were asked to rate tools on a scale of 1 5 (low to
high) based on the extent of their use and the potential of the tools to help improve project
success. Super tools were defined as those that had high use and high potential for
TABLE 1-1 Common project management tools and techniques by knowledge area
Knowledge area/category Tools and techniques
Integration management Project selection methods, project management
methodologies, stakeholder analyses, project charters,
project management plans, project management
software, change requests, change control
boards, project review meetings, lessons-learned
reports
Scope management Scope statements, work breakdown structures,
statements of work, requirements analyses, scope
management plans, scope verification techniques,
and scope change controls
Time management Gantt charts, project network diagrams, critical
path analysis, crashing, fast tracking, schedule
performance measurements
Cost management Net present value, return on investment, payback
analysis, earned value management, project portfolio
management, cost estimates, cost management
plans, cost baselines
Quality management Quality metrics, checklists, quality control charts,
Pareto diagrams, fishbone diagrams, maturity
models, statistical methods
Human resource management Motivation techniques, empathic listening, responsibility
assignment matrices, project organizational
charts, resource histograms, team building
exercises
Communications
management
Communications management plans, kick-off
meetings, conflict management, communications
media selection, status and progress reports, virtual
communications, templates, project Web sites
Risk management Risk management plans, risk registers, probability/
impact matrices, risk rankings
Procurement management Make-or-buy analyses, contracts, requests for proposals
or quotes
Project Success
How do you define the success or failure of a project? There are several ways to define project
success. The list that follows outlines a few common criteria for measuring the success
of a project using the example of upgrading 500 desktop computers within three months for
$300,000:
1. The project met scope, time, and cost goals. If all 500 computers were
upgraded and met other scope requirements, the work was completed in three
months or less, and the cost was $300,000 or less, you could consider it a
14
Chapter 1
successful project based on this criterion. The Standish Group studies used
this definition of success. Several people question this simple definition of project
success and the methods used for collecting the data. (See the references
by Glass on the companion Web site for this text to read more about this
debate.)
2. The project satisfied the customer/sponsor. Even if the project met initial
scope, time, and cost goals, the users of the computers or their managers (the
main customers or sponsors in this example) might not be satisfied. Perhaps
the project manager or team members never returned calls or were rude. Perhaps
users had their daily work disrupted during the upgrades or had to work
extra hours due to the upgrades. If the customers were not happy with important
aspects of the project, it would be deemed a failure. Conversely, a project
might not meet initial scope, time, and cost goals, but the customer could still
be very satisfied. Perhaps the project team took longer and spent more money
than planned, but they were very polite and helped the users and managers
solve several work-related problems. Many organizations implement a customer
satisfaction rating system for projects to measure project success instead
of only tracking scope, time, and cost performance.
3. The results of the projectmet itsmain objective, such asmaking or saving a
certain amount ofmoney, providing a good return on investment, or simply
making the sponsors happy. Even if the project costmore than estimated, took
longer to complete, and the project teamwas hard to work with, if the users
were happy with the upgraded computers it would be a successful project, based
on this criterion. As another example, suppose the sponsor really approved the
upgrade project to provide a good return on investment by speeding up work
and therefore generating more profits. If those goals were met, the sponsor
would deemthe project a success, regardless of other factors involved.
Why do some IT projects succeed and others fail? Table 1-2 summarizes the results of
the 2001 CHAOS study, describing, in order of importance, what factors contribute most
to the success of information technology projects. The study lists executive support as the
most important factor, overtaking user involvement, which was ranked first in earlier studies.
Also note that several other success factors can be strongly influenced by executives
such as encouraging user involvement, providing clear business objectives, assigning an
experienced project manager, using a standard software infrastructure, and following a formal
methodology. Other success factors are related to good project scope and time management
such as having a minimized scope, firm basic requirements, and reliable estimates.
In fact, experienced project managers, who can often help influence all of these factors to
improve the probability of project success, led 97 percent of successful projects.
It is interesting to compare success factors for information technology projects in the
U.S. with those in other countries. A 2004 study summarizes the results of a survey of
247 information systems project practitioners in mainland China. One of the study s key
findings is that relationship management is viewed as a top success factor for information
systems in China, while it is not mentioned in U.S. studies. The study also suggested that
having competent team members is less important in China than in the U.S. The Chinese,
like the Americans, included top management support, user involvement, and a competent
project manager as vital to project success.
Chapter Summary
There is a new or renewed interest in project management today as the number of projects continues
to grow and their complexity continues to increase. The success rate of information technology
projects has more than doubled since 1995, but still only about a third are successful in
meeting scope, time, and cost goals. Using a more disciplined approach to managing projects can
help projects and organizations succeed.
A project is a temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product, service, or result.
An information technology project involves the use of hardware, software, and/or networks. Projects
are unique, temporary, and developed incrementally; they require resources, have a sponsor,
and involve uncertainty. The triple constraint of project management refers to managing the
scope, time, and cost dimensions of a project.
Project management is the application of knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques to project
activities to meet project requirements. Stakeholders are the people involved in or affected by
project activities. A framework for project management includes the project stakeholders, project
management knowledge areas, and project management tools and techniques. The nine knowledge
areas are project integration management, scope, time, cost, quality, human resource,
communications, risk, and procurement management. There are many tools and techniques in
each knowledge area. There are different ways to define project success, and project managers
must understand the success criteria for their unique projects.
A program is a group of related projects managed in a coordinated way to obtain benefits and
control not available from managing them individually. Project portfolio management involves
organizing and managing projects and programs as a portfolio of investments that contribute to
theentire enterprise s success. Portfolio management emphasizes meeting strategic goals while
project management focuses on tactical goals. Studies show that executive support is crucial to
project success, as are other factors like user involvement, an experienced project manager, and
clear business objectives.
Project managers play a key role in helping projects and organizations succeed. They must
perform various job duties, possess many skills, and continue to develop skills in project management,
general management, and their application area, such as information technology. Soft skills,
especially leadership, are particularly important for project managers.
The profession of projectmanagement continues to grow andmature. In the U.S., themilitary
took the lead in projectmanagement and developedmany tools such asGantt charts and network
diagrams, but today people use projectmanagement in virtually every industry around the globe. The
ProjectManagement Institute (PMI) is an international professional society that provides certification
as a ProjectManagement Professional (PMP) and upholds a code of ethics. Today, hundreds of
projectmanagement software products are available to assist people inmanaging projects.

Key Terms
best practice — An optimal way recognized by industry to achieve a stated goal or objective
critical path — The longest path through a network diagram that determines the earliest
completion of a project
enterprise project management software — Software that integrates information from multiple
projects to show the status of active, approved, and future projects across an entire
organization; also called portfolio project management software
ethics — A set of principles that guide our decision making based on personal values of what is
right and wrong
Gantt chart— A standard format for displaying project schedule information by listing project
activities and their corresponding start and finish dates in a calendar format
green IT or green computing — Developing and using computer resources in an efficient way
to improve economic viability, social responsibility, and environmental impact
leader — A person who focuses on long-term goals and big-picture objectives, while inspiring
people to reach those goals
manager — A person who deals with the day-to-day details of meeting specific goals
portfolio project management software — Software that integrates information from multiple
projects to show the status of active, approved, and future projects across an entire
organization; also called enterprise project management software
program — A group of projects managed in a coordinated way to obtain benefits and control
not available from managing them individually
program manager — A person who provides leadership and direction for the project managers
heading the projects within a program
project— A temporary endeavor undertaken to create a unique product, service, or result
project management — The application of knowledge, skills, tools, and techniques to project
activities to meet project requirements
Project Management Institute (PMI)— An international professional society for project
managers
project management knowledge areas — Project integration management, scope, time, cost,
quality, human resource, communications, risk, and procurement management
39
Introduction to Project Management
Project Management Office (PMO) — An organizational group responsible for coordinating the
project management functions throughout an organization
Project Management Professional (PMP) — Certification provided by PMI that requires
documenting project experience and education, agreeing to follow the PMI code of ethics,
and passing a comprehensive exam
project management tools and techniques — Methods available to assist project managers
and their teams; some popular tools in the time management knowledge area include Gantt
charts, network diagrams, and critical path analysis
project manager — The person responsible for working with the project sponsor, the project
team, and the other people involved in a project to meet project goals
project portfolio management or portfolio management — When organizations group and
manage projects as a portfolio of investments that contribute to the entire enterprise s
success
project sponsor — The person who provides the direction and funding for a project
stakeholders — People involved in or affected by project activities
triple constraint — Balancing scope, time, and cost goals
virtualization — Hiding the physical characteristics of computing resources from their users,
such as making a single server, operating system, application, or storage device appear
to function as multiple virtual resources.
 
C A S E S T U D Y : JWD C O N S U L T I N G ’ S
P R O J E C T M A N A G E M E N T I N T R A N E T
S I T E P R O J E C T
The following fictitious case provides an example of the elements involved in managing a
project from start to finish. This example also uses Microsoft Project to demonstrate how
project management software can assist in several aspects of managing a project. Several
templates illustrate how project teams prepare various project management documents.
Files for these and other templates are available on the companion Web site for this text.
Details on creating many of the documents shown are provided in later chapters, so do not
worry if you do not understand everything right now. You might want to read this section
again to enhance your learning.
Project Pre-Initiation and Initiation
In project management, initiating includes recognizing and starting a new project. An organization
should put considerable thought into project selection to ensure that it initiates
the right kinds of projects for the right reasons. It is better to have a moderate or even
small amount of success on an important project than huge success on one that is unimportant.
The selection of projects for initiation, therefore, is crucial, as is the selection of
project managers. Ideally, the project manager would be involved in initiating a project,
but often the project manager is selected after many initiation decisions have already been
made. You will learn more about project selection in Chapter 4, Project Integration Management.
Organizations must also understand and plan for the ongoing support that is
often required after implementing a new system or other product or service resulting from
a project.
It is important to remember that strategic planning should serve as the foundation
for deciding which projects to pursue. The organization s strategic plan expresses the
vision, mission, goals, objectives, and strategies of the organization. It also provides the
basis for information technology project planning. Information technology is usually a
support function in an organization, so it is critical that the people initiating information
technology projects understand how those projects relate to current and future needs
of the organization. For example, JWD Consulting s main business is providing consulting
services to other organizations, not developing its own intranet site applications. Information
systems, therefore, must support the firms business goals, such as providing consulting
services more effectively and efficiently.
An organization may initiate information technology projects for several reasons, but
the most important reason is to support business objectives. Providing a good return on
investment at a reasonable level of risk is also important, especially in tough economic
times. As mentioned in the opening case, JWD Consulting wants to follow an exemplary process
for managing its projects since its core business is helping other organizations manage
projects. Developing an intranet to share its project management knowledge could help JWD
Consulting reduce internal costs by working more effectively, and by allowing existing and
potential customers to access some of the firms information. JWD Consulting could also
increase revenues by bringing in more business. Therefore, they will use these metrics
reducing internal costs and increasing revenues to measure their own performance on this
project.
Pre-Initiation Tasks
It is good practice to lay the groundwork for a project before it officially starts. Senior managers
often perform several tasks, sometimes called pre-initiation tasks, including the following:
Determine the scope, time, and cost constraints for the project
Identify the project sponsor
The Project Management Process Groups: A Case Study
Select the project manager
Develop a business case for a project
Meet with the project manager to review the process and expectations for
managing the project
Determine if the project should be divided into two or more smaller
projects
As described in the opening case, the CEO of JWD Consulting, Joe Fleming, defined
the high-level scope of the project, and he wanted to sponsor it himself since it was his
idea and it was of strategic importance to the business. He wanted Erica Bell, the PMO
Director, to manage the project after proving there was a strong business case for it. If
there was a strong business case for pursuing the project, then Joe and Erica would meet
to review the process and expectations for managing the project. If there was not a strong
business case, the project would not continue. As for the necessity of the last pre-initiation
task, many people know from experience that it is easier to successfully complete a small
project than a large one, especially for IT projects. It often makes sense to break large
projects down into two or more smaller ones to help increase the odds of success. In this
case, however, Joe and Erica decided that the work could be done in one project that
would last about six months. To justify investing in this project, Erica drafted a business
case for the project, getting input and feedback from Joe, from one of her senior staff
members in the PMO, and from a member of the Finance department. She also used a
corporate template and sample business cases from past projects as a guide. Table 3-2 provides
the business case. (Note that this example and others are abbreviated examples. See
the companion Web site for additional examples of project documents and to download a
business case template and other templates.) Notice that the following information is
included in this business case:
Introduction/background
Business objective
Current situation and problem/opportunity statement
Critical assumptions and constraints
Analysis of options and recommendation
Preliminary project requirements
Budget estimate and financial analysis
Schedule estimate
Potential risks
Exhibits
Since this project is relatively small and is for an internal sponsor, the business case is
not as long as many other business cases. Erica reviewed the business case with Joe, and
he agreed that the project was definitely worth pursuing. He was quite pleased to see that
payback was estimated within a year, and the return on investment was projected to be
112 percent. He told Erica to proceed with the formal initiation tasks for this project, as
described in the next section.
TABLE 3-2 JWD Consulting s business case
1.0 Introduction/Background
JWD Consulting s core business goal is to provide world-class project management consulting
services to various organizations. The CEO, Joe Fleming, believes the firm can
streamline operations and increase business by providing information related to project
management on its intranet site, making some information and services accessible to
current and potential clients.
2.0 Business Objective
JWD Consulting s strategic goals include continuing growth and profitability. The Project
Management Intranet Site Project will support these goals by increasing visibility of the
firms expertise to current and potential clients by allowing client and public access to
some sections of the intranet. It will also improve profitability by reducing internal costs
by providing standard tools, techniques, templates, and project management knowledge
to all internal consultants. Since JWD Consulting focuses on identifying profitable projects
and measuring their value after completion, this project must meet those criteria.
3.0 Current Situation and Problem/Opportunity Statement
JWD Consulting has a corporateWeb site as well as an intranet. The firmcurrently uses the
Web site formarketing information. The primary use of the intranet is for human resource
information, such as where consultants enter their hours on various projects, change and
view their benefits information, access an online directory andWeb-based e-mail system,
and so on. The firmalso uses an enterprise-wide projectmanagement systemto track all
project information, focusing on the status of deliverables andmeeting scope, time, and cost
goals. There is an opportunity to provide a new section on the intranet dedicated to sharing
consultants projectmanagement knowledge across the organization. JWD Consulting only
hires experienced consultants and gives themfreedomtomanage projects as they see fit.
However, as the business grows and projects becomemore complex, even experienced
projectmanagers are looking for suggestions on how to workmore effectively.
4.0 Critical Assumption and Constraints
The proposed intranet sitemust be a valuable asset for JWD Consulting. Current consultants
and clientsmust actively support the project, and itmust pay for itself within one year by
reducing internal operating costs and generating new business. The Project Management
Officemanager must lead the effort, and the project teammust include participants from
several parts of the company, as well as current client organizations. The new systemmust
run on existing hardware and software, and it should require minimal technical support. It
must be easily accessible by consultants and clients and be secure from unauthorized
users.
5.0 Analysis of Options and Recommendation
There are three options for addressing this opportunity:
1. Do nothing. The business is doing well, and we can continue to operate without this new
project.
2. Purchase access to specialized software to support this new capability with little in-house
development.
(continued)
TABLE 3-2 JWD Consulting s business case (continued)
3. Design and implement the new intranet capabilities in-house using mostly existing hardware
and software.
Based on discussions with stakeholders, we believe that option 3 is the best option.
6.0 Preliminary Project Requirements
The main features of the project management intranet site include the following:
1. Access to several project management templates and tools. Users must be able to search for
templates and tools, read instructions on using these templates and tools, and see examples
of how to apply them to real projects. Users must also be able to submit new templates and
tools, which should be first screened or edited by the Project Management Office.
2. Access to relevant project management articles. Many consultants and clients feel as
though there is an information overload when they research project management information.
They often waste time they should be spending with their clients. The new intranet
should include access to several important articles on various project management topics,
which are searchable by topic, and allow users to request the Project Management Office
staff to find additional articles to meet their needs.
3. Links to other, up-to-date Web sites, with brief descriptions of the main features of the
external site.
4. An Ask the Expert feature to help build relationships with current and future clients and
share knowledge with internal consultants.
5. Appropriate security to make the entire intranet site accessible to internal consultants and
certain sections accessible to others.
6. The ability to charge money for access to some information. Some of the information and
features of the intranet site should prompt external users to pay for the information or service.
Payment options should include a credit card option or similar online payment transactions.
After the system verifies payment, the user should be able to access or download
the desired information.
7. Other features suggested by users, if they add value to the business.
7.0 Budget Estimate and Financial Analysis
A preliminary estimate of costs for the entire project is $140,000. This estimate is based on
the projectmanager working about 20 hours per week for sixmonths and other internal staff
working a total of about 60 hours per week for six months. The customer representatives
would not be paid for their assistance. A staff projectmanager would earn $50 per hour. The
hourly rate for the other project team members would be $70 per hour, since some hours
normally billed to clients may be needed for this project. The initial cost estimate also
includes $10,000 for purchasing software and services from suppliers. After the project is
completed,maintenance costs of $40,000 are included for each year, primarily to update the
information and coordinate the Ask the Expert feature and online articles.
Projected benefits are based on a reduction in hours consultants spend researching
project management information, appropriate tools and templates, and so on. Projected
benefits are also based on a small increase in profits due to new business generated by this
project. If each of more than 400 consultants saved just 40 hours each year (less than one
hour per week) and could bill that time to other projects that generate a conservative
estimate of $10 per hour in profits, then the projected benefit would be $160,000 per year.
If the new intranet increased business by just 1 percent, using past profit information,
90
increased profits due to new business would be at least $40,000 each year. Total projected
benefits, therefore, are about $200,000 per year.
Exhibit A summarizes the projected costs and benefits and shows the estimated net present
value (NPV), return on investment (ROI), and year in which payback occurs. It also lists
assumptionsmade inperforming this preliminary financial analysis.All of the financial estimates
are veryencouraging.The estimatedpaybackiswithinone year, as requestedbythe sponsor.The
NPV is $272,800, and the discounted ROI based on a three-year system life is excellent at
112 percent.
8.0 Schedule Estimate
The sponsor would like to see the project completed within six months, but there is some
flexibility in the schedule. We also assume that the new system will have a useful life of
at least three years.
9.0 Potential Risks
There are several risks involved with this project. The foremost risk is a lack of interest
in the new system by our internal consultants and external clients. User inputs are crucial
for populating information into this system and realizing the potential benefits from
using the system. There are some technical risks in choosing the type of software used
to search the system, check security, process payments, and so on, but the features of
this system all use proven technologies. The main business risk is investing the time and
money into this project and not realizing the projected benefits.
10.0 Exhibits
Exhibit A: Financial Analysis for Project Management Intranet Site Project
TABLE 3-2 JWD Consulting s business case (continued)
Discount rate 8%
Assume the project is done in about 6 months
0 1 2 3 Total
Costs 140,000 40,000 40,000 40,000
Discount factor 1 0.93 0.86 0.79
Discounted costs 140,000 37,037 34,294 31,753 243,084
Benefits 200,000 200,000 200,000
Discount factor 0.93 0.86 0.79
Discounted benefits 186,185 171,468 158,766 515,419
Discounted benefits - costs (140,000) 148,148 137,174 127,013
Cumulative benefits - costs (140,000) 8,148 145,322 272,336 NPV
Payback in Year 1
Discounted life cycle ROI------------> 112%
Assumptions
Costs # hours
PM (500 hours, $50/hour) 25,000
Staff (1500 hours, $70/hour) 105,000
Outsourced software and services 10,000
Total project costs (all applied in year 0)
Benefits
# consultants 400
Hours saved 40
$/hour profit 10
Benefits from saving time 160,000
Benefits from 1% increase in profits 40,000
Total annual projected benefits 200,000
Year
140,000
0
0
1
Initiating
To officially initiate the Project Management Intranet Site project, Erica knew that main tasks
were to identify all of the project stakeholders and to develop the project charter. Table 3-3
shows these processes and their outputs, based on the PMBOK® Guide Fourth Edition. The
main outputs are a project charter, stakeholder register, and stakeholder management strategy.
Another output that Erica found very useful for initiating projects was a formal project
kick-off meeting. Descriptions of how these outputs were created and sample documents related
to each of them are provided for this particular project. Recall that every project and every
organization is unique, so not all project charters, stakeholder registers, etc. will look the
same. You will see examples of several of these documents in later chapters.
Identifying Project Stakeholders
Erica met with Joe Fleming, the project s sponsor, to help identify key stakeholders for this
project. Recall from Chapter 1 that stakeholders are people involved in or affected by project
activities and include the project sponsor, project team, support staff, customers, users,
suppliers, and even opponents to the project. Joe, the project sponsor, knew it would be
important to assemble a strong project team, and he was very confident in Erica s ability
to lead that team. They decided that key team members should include one of their fulltime
consultants with an outstanding record, Michael Chen, one part-time consultant, Jessie
Faue, who was new to the company and supported the Project Management Office, and two
members of the Information Technology (IT) department who supported the current intranet,
Kevin Dodge and Cindy Dawson. They also knew that client inputs would be important
for this project, so Joe agreed to call the CEOs of two of the firms largest clients to see if
they would be willing to provide representatives to work on this project at their own
expense. All of the internal staff Joe and Erica recommended agreed to work on the project,
and the two client representatives would be Kim Phuong and Page Miller. Since many other
people would be affected by this project as future users of the new intranet, they also identified
other key stakeholders including their directors of IT, Human Resources (HR), and
Public Relations (PR), as well as Erica s administrative assistant.
After Joe and Erica made the preliminary contacts, Erica documented the stakeholders
roles, names, organizations, and contact information in a stakeholder register, a document
that includes details related to the identified project stakeholders. Table 3-4 provides an
example of part of the initial stakeholder register. Since this document would be public, Erica
was careful not to include information that might be sensitive, such as how strongly the
stakeholder supported the project, potential influence on the project, requirements and
TABLE 3-3 Project initiation knowledge areas, processes, and outputs
Knowledge Area Initiating Process Outputs
Project Integration
Management
Develop project
charter
Project charter
Project Communications
Management
Identify stakeholders Stakeholder register
Stakeholder
management
strategy
expectations, etc. She would keep these issues in mind discretely and use them in developing
the stakeholder management strategy.
A stakeholder management strategy is an approach to help increase the support of stakeholders
throughout the project. It includes basic information such as stakeholder names, level
of interest in the project, level of influence on the project, and potential management strategies
for gaining support or reducing obstacles from that particular stakeholder. Since much of this
information can be sensitive, it should be considered confidential. Some project managers do
not even write down this information, but they do consider it since stakeholder management
is a crucial part of their jobs. Table 3-5 provides an example of part of Erica s stakeholdermanagement
strategy for the Project Management Intranet Site project. You will see other examples
of documenting stakeholder information in later chapters.
TABLE 3-4 Stakeholder register
Name Position Internal/
External
Project
Role
Contact Information
Joe
Fleming
CEO Internal Sponsor joe_fleming@jwdconsulting.com
Erica
Bell
PMO
Director
Internal Project
manager
erica_bell@jwdconsulting.com
Michael
Chen
Team
member
Internal Team
member
michael_chen@jwdconsulting.com
Kim
Phuong
Business
analyst
External Advisor kim_phuong@client1.com
Louise
Mills
PR
Director
Internal Advisor louise_mills@jwdconsulting.com
TABLE 3-5 Stakeholder management strategy
Name Level of
Interest
Level of
Influence
Potential Management Strategies
Joe
Fleming
High High Joe likes to stay on top of key projects and
make money. Have a lot of short, face-toface
meetings and focus on achieving the
financial benefits of the project.
Louise
Mills
Low High Louise has a lot of things on her plate,
and she does not seem excited about this
project. She may be looking at other job
opportunities. Show her how this project
will help the company and her resume.
Drafting the Project Charter
Erica drafted a project charter and had the project team members review it before showing it
to Joe. Joemade a fewminor changes,which Erica incorporated. Table 3-6 shows the final project
charter (see Chapter 4 for more information on project charters). Note the items included
on the project charter and its short length. JWD Consulting believes that project charters
should preferably be one or two pages long, and they may refer to other documents, such as a
business case, as needed. Erica felt the most important parts of the project charter were the signatures
of key stakeholders (not included for brevity) and their individual comments. It is hard
to get stakeholders to agree on even a one-page project charter, so everyone has a chance to
make their concerns known in the comments section. Note that Michael Chen, the senior consultant
asked to work on the project, was concerned about working on this project when he felt
that his other assignments with external clients might have a higher priority. He offered to have
an assistant help as needed. The information technology staff members mentioned their
concerns about testing and security issues. Erica knew that she would have to consider these
concerns when managing the project.
TABLE 3-6 Project charter
Project Title: Project Management Intranet Site Project
Project Start Date: May 2 Projected Finish Date: November 4
Budget Information: The firm has allocated $140,000 for this project. The majority of costs for
this project will be internal labor. An initial estimate provides a total of 80 hours per week.
Project Manager: Erica Bell, (310) 555-5896, erica_bell@jwdconsulting.com
Project Objectives: Develop a new capability accessible on JWD Consulting s intranet site
to help internal consultants and external customers manage projects more effectively.
The intranet site will include several templates and tools that users can download, examples
of completed templates and related project management documents used on real
projects, important articles related to recent project management topics, an article
retrieval service, links to other sites with useful information, and an Ask the Expert feature,
where users can post questions they have about their projects and receive advice
from experts in the field. Some parts of the intranet site will be accessible free to the public,
other parts will only be accessible to current customers and/or internal consultants,
and other parts of the intranet site will be accessible for a fee.
Main Project Success Criteria: The project should pay for itself within one year of completion.
Approach:
Develop a survey to determine critical features of the new intranet site and solicit
input from consultants and customers.
Review internal and external templates and examples of project management
documents.
Research software to provide security, manage user inputs, and facilitate the article
retrieval and Ask the Expert features.
Develop the intranet site using an iterative approach, soliciting a great deal of user
feedback.
Holding a Project Kick-off Meeting
Experienced project managers like Erica know that it is crucial to get projects off to a great
start. Holding a good kick-off meeting is an excellent way to do this. A kick-off meeting is
a meeting held at the beginning of a project so that stakeholders can meet each other,
review the goals of the project, and discuss future plans. The kick-off meeting is often held
after the business case and project charter are completed, but it could be held sooner, as
needed. Even if some or even all project stakeholders must meet virtually, it is still
important to have a kick-off meeting.
Erica also knows that all project meetings with major stakeholders should include an
agenda. Figure 3-2 shows the agenda that Erica provided for the Project Management
Intranet Site project kick-off meeting. Notice the main topics in an agenda:
Meeting objective
Agenda (lists in order the topics to be discussed)
Determine a way to measure the value of the intranet site in terms of reduced costs
and new revenues, both during the project and one year after project completion.
ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Name Role Position Contact Information
Joe Fleming Sponsor JWD Consulting, CEO joe_fleming@jwdconsulting.com
Erica Bell Project
Manager
JWD Consulting,
manager
erica_bell@jwdconsulting.com
Michael Chen Team
Member
JWD Consulting,
senior consultant
michael_chen@jwdconsulting.com
Jessie Faue Team
Member
JWD Consulting,
consultant
jessie_faue@jwdconsulting.com
Kevin Dodge Team
Member
JWD Consulting, IT
department
kevin_dodge@jwdconsulting.com
Cindy
Dawson
Team
Member
JWD Consulting, IT
department
cindy_dawson@jwdconsulting.com
Kim Phuong Advisor Client representative kim_phuong@client1.com
Page Miller Advisor Client representative page_miller@client2.com
Sign-Off: (Signatures of all the above stakeholders)
Comments: (Handwritten or typed comments from above stakeholders, if applicable)
“I will support this project as time allows, but I believe my client projects take priority. I will have one of my
assistants support the project as needed.”—Michael Chen
We need to be extremely careful testing this new system, especially the security in
giving access to parts of the intranet site to the public and clients. Kevin Dodge
and Cindy Dawson
The Project Management Process Groups: A Case Study
A section for documenting action items, who they are assigned to, and when
each person will complete the action
A section to document the date and time of the next meeting
It is good practice to focus on results of meetings, and having sections for documenting
action items and deciding on the next meeting date and time on the agenda helps to do so.
It is also good practice to document meeting minutes, focusing on key decisions and action
items. Erica planned to send the meeting minutes to all meeting participants and other
appropriate stakeholders within a day or two of the meeting.
Project Planning
Planning is often the most difficult and unappreciated process in project management.
Because planning is not always used to facilitate action, many people view planning negatively.
The main purpose of project plans, however, is to guide project execution. To guide
execution, plans must be realistic and useful, so a fair amount of time and effort must go
into the planning process; people knowledgeable with the work need to plan the work.
[Date of Meeting]
Project Management Intranet Site Project
FIGURE 3-2 Kick-off meeting agenda
Chapter 4, Project Integration Management, provides detailed information on preparing a
project management plan, and Chapters 5 through 12 describe planning processes for each
of the other knowledge areas.
Table 3-7 lists the project management knowledge areas, processes, and outputs of project
planning according to the PMBOK® Guide, Fourth Edition. There are many potential outputs
from the planning process group, and every knowledge area is included. Just a few planning
documents from JWD Consulting s Project Management Intranet Site Project are provided in
this chapter as examples, and later chapters include many more examples. Recall that the
PMBOK® Guide is only a guide, so many organizations may have different planning outputs
based on their particular needs, as is the case in this example. There are many templates
related to planning as well, with several listed in the last section of this chapter.
TABLE 3-7 Planning processes and outputs
Knowledge Area Planning Process Outputs
Project
Integration
Management
Develop project
management plan
Project management plan
Project Scope
Management
Collect requirements Requirements documents
Requirements management plan
Requirements traceability matrix
Define scope Project scope statement
Project document updates
Create WBS WBS
WBS dictionary
Scope baseline
Project document updates
Project Time
Management
Define activities Activity list
Activity attributes
Milestone list
Sequence activities Project schedule network
diagrams
Project document updates
Estimate activity
resources
Activity resource requirements
Resource breakdown structure
Project document updates
Estimate activity
durations
Activity duration estimates
Project document updates
Develop schedule Project schedule
Schedule baseline
The Project Management Process Groups: A Case Study
Schedule data
Project document updates
Project Cost
Management
Estimate costs Activity cost estimates
Basis of estimates
Project document updates
Determine budget Cost performance baseline
Project funding requirements
Project document updates
Project Quality
Management
Plan quality Quality management plan
Quality metrics
Quality checklists
Process improvement plan
Project document updates
Project Human
Resource
Management
Develop human
resource plan
Human resource plan
Project
Communications
Management
Plan communications Communications
management plan
Project document updates
Project Risk
Management
Plan risk management Risk management plan
Identify risks Risk register
Perform qualitative
risk analysis
Risk register updates
Perform quantitative
risk analysis
Risk register updates
Plan risk responses Risk register updates
Project management plan updates
Risk related contract decisions
Project document updates
Project
Procurement
Management
Plan procurements Procurement management plan
Procurement statement of work
Make-or-buy decisions
Procurement documents
Source selection criteria
Change requests
TABLE 3-7 Planning processes and outputs (continued)
Knowledge Area Planning Process Outputs
Since the Project Management Intranet Site project is relatively small, Erica believes
some of the most important planning documents to focus on are the following:
A team contract (not listed in Table 3-7, which is based only on the PMBOK®
Guide)
A project scope statement
A work breakdown structure (WBS)
A project schedule, in the form of a Gantt chart with all dependencies and
resources entered
A list of prioritized risks (part of a risk register)
All of these documents, as well as other project-related information, will be available
to all team members on a project Web site. JWD Consulting has used project Web sites for
several years, and has found that they really help facilitate communications and document
project information. For larger projects, JWD Consulting also creates many of the other outputs
listed in Table 3-7. (You will learn more about these documents by knowledge area in
the following chapters.)
Soon after the project team signed the project charter, Erica organized a team-building
meeting for the Project Management Intranet Site Project. An important part of the meeting
was helping the project team get to know each other. Erica had met and talked to each
member separately, but this was the first time the project team would spend much time
together. Jessie Faue worked in the Project Management Office with Erica, so they knew each
other well, but Jessie was new to the company and did not know any of the other team members.
Michael Chen was a senior consultant and often worked on the highest priority projects
for external clients. He attended the meeting with his assistant, Jill Anderson, who would also
support the project when Michael was too busy. Everyone valued Michael s expertise, and he
was extremely straightforward in dealing with people. He also knew both of the client representatives
frompast projects. Kevin Dodge was JWD Consulting s intranet guru who tended
to focus on technical details. Cindy Dawson was also fromthe Information Technology department
and had experience working as a business consultant and negotiating with outside suppliers.
Kim Phuong and Page Miller, the two client representatives, were excited about the
project, but they were wary of sharing sensitive information about their company.
Erica had everyone introduce him or herself, and then she facilitated an icebreaker
activity so everyone would be more relaxed. She asked everyone to describe his or her
dream vacation, assuming cost was no issue. This activity helped everyone get to know each
other and show different aspects of their personalities. Erica knew that it was important to
build a strong team and have everyone work well together.
Erica then explained the importance of the project, again reviewing the signed project
charter. She explained that an important tool to help a project team work together was
to have members develop a team contract that everyone felt comfortable signing. JWD
Consulting believed in using team contracts for all projects to help promote teamwork and
clarify team communications. She explained the main topics covered in a team contract
and showed them a team contract template. She then had the team members form two
smaller groups, with one consultant, one Information Technology department member,
and one client representative in each group. These smaller groups made it easier for everyone
to contribute ideas. Each group shared their ideas for what should go into the contract,
and then they worked together to form one project team contract. Table 3-8 shows
the resulting team contract, which took about 90 minutes to create. Erica could see that
The Project Management Process Groups: A Case Study
TABLE 3-8 Team contract
Code of Conduct: As a project team, we will:
Work proactively, anticipating potential problems and working to prevent
them.
Keep other team members informed of information related to the project.
Focus on what is best for the entire project team.
Participation: We will:
Be honest and open during all project activities.
Encourage diversity in team work.
Provide the opportunity for equal participation.
Be open to new approaches and consider new ideas.
Have one discussion at a time.
Let the project manager know well in advance if a team member has to miss a
meeting or may have trouble meeting a deadline for a given task.
Communication: We will:
Decide as a team on the best way to communicate. Since a few team members
cannot meet often for face-to-face meetings, we will use e-mail, a project Web
site, and other technology to assist in communicating.
Have the project manager facilitate all meetings and arrange for phone and video
conferences, as needed.
Work together to create the project schedule and enter actuals into our enterprise-
wide project management system by 4 p.m. every Friday.
Present ideas clearly and concisely.
Keep discussions on track.
Problem Solving: We will:
Encourage everyone to participate in solving problems.
Only use constructive criticism and focus on solving problems, not blaming
people.
Strive to build on each other s ideas.
Meeting Guidelines: We will:
Plan to have a face-to-face meeting the first and third Tuesday morning of every
month.
Meet more frequently the first month.
Arrange for telephone or videoconferencing for participants as needed.
Hold other meetings as needed.
Record meeting minutes and send them out via e-mail within 24 hours of all
project meetings, focusing on decisions made and action items from each
meeting.
there were different personalities on this team, but she felt they all could work together
well.
Erica wanted to keep their meeting to its two-hour time limit. Their next task would
be to clarify the scope of the project by developing a project scope statement and WBS. She
knew it took time to develop these documents, but she wanted to get a feel for what everyone
thought were the main deliverables for this project, their roles in producing those deliverables,
and what areas of the project scope needed clarification. She reminded everyone
what their budget and schedule goals were so they would keep that in mind as they discussed
the scope of the project. She also asked each person to provide the number of hours
he or she would be available to work on this project each month for the next six months.
She then had each person write down his or her answers to the following questions:
1. List one item that is most unclear to you about the scope of this project.
2. What other questions do you have or issues do you foresee about the scope of
the project?
3. List what you believe to be the main deliverables for this project.
4. Which deliverables do you think you will help create or review?
Erica collected everyone s inputs. She explained that she would take this information
and work with Jessie to develop the first draft of the scope statement that she would e-mail
to everyone by the end of the week. She also suggested that they all meet again in one week
to develop the scope statement further and to start creating the WBS for the project.
Erica and Jessie reviewed all the information and created the first draft of the scope
statement. At their next team meeting, they discussed the scope statement and got a good
start on the WBS. Table 3-9 shows a portion of the scope statement that Erica created after
a few more e-mails and another team meeting. Note that the scope statement lists the product
characteristics and requirements, summarizes the deliverables, and describes project
success criteria in detail.
TABLE 3-9 Scope statement (draft version)
Project Title: Project Management Intranet Site Project
Date: May 18 Prepared by: Erica Bell, Project Manager,
erica_bell@jwdconsulting.com
Project Summary and Justification: Joe Fleming, CEO of JWD Consulting, requested
this project to assist the company in meeting its strategic goals. The new intranet site
will increase visibility of the company s expertise to current and potential clients. It
will also help reduce internal costs and improve profitability by providing standard
tools, techniques, templates, and project management knowledge to all internal consultants.
The budget for the project is $140,000. An additional $40,000 per year will
be required for operational expenses after the project is completed. Estimated benefits
are $200,000 each year. It is important to focus on the system paying for itself
within one year of its completion.
Product Characteristics and Requirements:
1. Templates and tools: The intranet site will allow authorized users to download files
they can use to create project management documents and to help them use project
(continued)
The Project Management Process Groups: A Case Study management tools. These files will be in Microsoft Word, Excel, Access, Project, or
in HTML or PDF format, as appropriate.
2. User submissions: Users will be encouraged to e-mail files with sample templates and
tools to the Webmaster. The Webmaster will forward the files to the appropriate person
for review and then post the files to the intranet site, if desired.
3. Articles: Articles posted on the intranet site will have appropriate copyright permission.
The preferred format for articles will be PDF. The project manager may approve
other formats.
4. Requests for articles: The intranet site will include a section for users to request
someone from the Project Management Office (PMO) at JWD Consulting to research
appropriate articles for them. The PMO manager must first approve the request and
negotiate payments, if appropriate.
5. Links: All links to external sites will be tested on a weekly basis. Broken links will
be fixed or removed within five working days of discovery.
6. The Ask the Expert feature must be user-friendly and capable of soliciting
questions and immediately acknowledging that the question has been received
in the proper format. The feature must also be capable of forwarding the
question to the appropriate expert (as maintained in the system s expert database)
and capable of providing the status of questions that are answered. The
system must also allow for payment for advice, if appropriate.
7. Security: The intranet site must provide several levels of security. All internal
employees will have access to the entire intranet site when they enter their security
information to access the main, corporate intranet. Part of the intranet will be available
to the public from the corporate Web site. Other portions of the intranet will
be available to current clients based on verification with the current client database.
Other portions of the intranet will be available after negotiating a fee or entering a
fixed payment using pre-authorized payment methods.
8. Search feature: The intranet site must include a search feature for users to search
by topic, key words, etc.
9. The intranet site must be accessible using a standard Internet browser. Users must
have appropriate application software to open several of the templates and tools.
10. The intranet site must be available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, with one hour per
week for system maintenance and other periodic maintenance, as appropriate.
Summary of Project Deliverables
Project management-related deliverables: Business case, charter, team contract, scope
statement, WBS, schedule, cost baseline, progress reports, final project presentation, final
project report, lessons-learned report, and any other documents required to manage the
project.
Product-related deliverables:
1. Survey: Survey current consultants and clients to help determine desired content
and features for the intranet site.
2. Files for templates: The intranet site will include templates for at least 20 documents
when the system is first implemented, and it will have the capacity to store up to 100
documents. The project team will decide on the initial 20 templates based on survey
results.
3. Examples of completed templates: The intranet site will include examples of projects
that have used the templates available on the intranet site. For example, if there is a
TABLE 3-9 Scope statement (draft version) (continued)
102
template for a business case, there will also be an example of a real business case that
uses the template.
4. Instructions for using project management tools: The intranet site will include information
on how to use several project management tools, including the following as a minimum:
work breakdown structures, Gantt charts, network diagrams, cost estimates,
and earned value management. Where appropriate, sample files will be provided in the
application software appropriate for the tool. For example, Microsoft Project files will
be available to show sample work breakdown structures, Gantt charts, network diagrams,
cost estimates, and applications of earned value management. Excel files will
be available for sample cost estimates and earned value management charts.
5. Example applications of tools: The intranet site will include examples of real projects
that have applied the tools listed in number 4 above.
6. Articles: The intranet site will include at least 10 useful articles about relevant topics
in project management. The intranet site will have the capacity to store at least
1,000 articles in PDF format with an average length of 10 pages each.
7. Links: The intranet site will include links with brief descriptions for at least 20 useful
sites. The links will be categorized into meaningful groups.
8. Expert database: In order to deliver an Ask the Expert feature, the system must
include and access a database of approved experts and their contact information.
Users will be able to search for experts by pre-defined topics.
9. User Requests feature: The intranet site will include an application to solicit and process
requests from users.
10. Intranet site design: An initial design of the new intranet site will include a site map,
suggested formats, appropriate graphics, etc. The final design will incorporate comments
from users on the initial design.
11. Intranet site content: The intranet site will include content for the templates and
tools section, articles section, article retrieval section, links section, Ask the Expert
section, User Requests feature, security, and payment features.
12. Test plan: The test plan will document how the intranet site will be tested, who will
do the testing, and how bugs will be reported.
13. Promotion: A plan for promoting the intranet site will describe various approaches for
soliciting inputs during design. The promotion plan will also announce the availability
of the new intranet site.
14. Project benefit measurement plan: A project benefit plan will measure the financial
value of the intranet site.
Project Success Criteria: Our goal is to complete this project within six months for no
more than $140,000. The project sponsor, Joe Fleming, has emphasized the importance
of the project paying for itself within one year after the intranet site is complete. To meet
this financial goal, the intranet site must have strong user inputs. We must also develop
a method for capturing the benefits while the intranet site is being developed and tested,
and after it is rolled out. If the project takes a little longer to complete or costs a little
more than planned, the firm will still view it as a success if it has a good payback and
helps promote the firms image as an excellent consulting organization.

Many people are familiar with SWOT analysis analyzing Strengths, Weaknesses,
Opportunities, and Threats which is used to aid in strategic planning. For example, a
group of four people who want to start a new business in the film industry could perform a
SWOT analysis to help identify potential projects. They might determine the following based
on a SWOT analysis:
Strengths:
As experienced professionals, we have numerous contacts in the film industry.
Two of us have strong sales and interpersonal skills.
Two of us have strong technical skills and are familiar with several filmmaking
software tools.
We all have impressive samples of completed projects.
Weaknesses:
None of us have accounting/financial experience.
We have no clear marketing strategy for products and services.
We have little money to invest in new projects.
We have no company Web site and limited use of technology to run the
business.
Opportunities:
A current client has mentioned a large project she would like us to bid on.
The film industry continues to grow.
There are two major conferences this year where we could promote our
company.
Threats:
Other individuals or companies can provide the services we can.
Customers might prefer working with more established individuals/
organizations.
There is high risk in the film business.
Based on their SWOT analysis, the four entrepreneurs outline potential projects as
follows:
Find an external accountant or firm to help run the business.
Hire someone to develop a company Web site, focusing on our experience and
past projects.
Develop a marketing plan.
Develop a strong proposal to get the large project the current client
mentioned.
Plan to promote the company at two major conferences this year.
Some people like to perform a SWOT analysis by using mind mapping, which is a technique
that uses branches radiating out from a core idea to structure thoughts and ideas. The
human brain does not work in a linear fashion. People come up with many unrelated ideas.
By putting those ideas down in a visual mind map format, you can often generate more ideas
than by just creating lists. You can create mind maps by hand, using sticky notes, using presentation
software such as Microsoft PowerPoint, or by using mind mapping software.
Figure 4-2 shows a sample mind map for the SWOT analysis presented earlier. This diagram
was created using MindManager software by Mindjet. (You can download a free trial
of this software from www.mindjet.com or use a similar free tool called FreeMind available
at www.freemind.sourceforge.net.) Notice that this map has four main branches representing
strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats. Icons are added to each of those main
branches to more visually identify them, such as the thumbs up for strengths and thumbs
down for weaknesses. Ideas in each category are added to the appropriate branch. You could
also add sub-branches to show ideas under those categories. For example, under the first
branch for strengths, you could start adding sub-branches to list the most important contacts
you have. This mind map includes branches for project ideas related to different categories,
with text markers used to identify the project names. From this visual example,
you can see that there are no project ideas identified to address strengths or threats, so
these areas should be discussed further.
